=pod

README for package 'moot'

Last updated for moot version 2.0.7

=head1 DESCRIPTION

moot - moocow's part-of-speech tagger and utilities.


=head1 REQUIREMENTS

=over 4


=item pkg-config (Required)

Available from:
http://www.freedesktop.org/software/pkgconfig/

To build from cvs, you will also need the pkg-config
autoconf macros which come with the source distribution
of pkg-config.


=item STL headers (Required)

If your C++ compiler does not have the STL
headers already installed, you will need
to get them from somewhere.
For gcc-2.x, I recommend STLport E<gt>= 4.5.3,
available from http://www.stlport.org
You will have to set the environment variables
CPPFLAGS, LDFLAGS, and LIBS according to
your installation before building.  Newer gcc versions (3.x,4.x)
have native STL support.

=item flex++ , bison++ (Optional)

Alain Coetmeur's C++ ports of the famous lexer/parser
generator pair, available from:
ftp://iecc.com/pub/file/bison++flex++
or
from the official distribution site of this package.

Tested with flex++-v2.3.8-4 and bison++-v1.21-5.

Should only be required if you want/need to mess with
the native I/O formats.  If the build fails during 'make',
just run:

 touch src/libmoot/*Lexer.*[ch] src/libmoot/*Parser.*[ch]

from the distribution root directory, and call make again.
Better yet, calling ./configure with:

 ./configure FLEXXX=no BISONXX=no

ought to do the trick too.

=item expat (Optional)

XML parser toolkit library by James Clark, required for XML input,
available from
http://expat.sourceforge.net

Tested version(s): 1.95.6, 1.95.8.


=item librecode (Optional)

Character-set recoding library by FranE<231>ois Pinard, useful for XML output,
available from
http://www.gnu.org/directory/recode.html

Tested version(s): 3.6.


=item zlib (Optional)

Compression library by Jean-loup Gailly and Mark Adler,
useful for compressed binary HMM files. 
Available from:
http://www.gzip.org/zlib

Tested version(s): 1.2.1., 1.2.3.3


=item doxygen (Optional)

Required for building library documentation.
Available from:
http://www.doxygen.org

Tested version(s): 1.2.15, 1.5.4


=item Perl (Optional)

Get it from http://www.cpan.org or http://www.perl.com
Required for building command-line parsers, utility
documentation, library documentation, etc.


=item Getopt::Gen (Optional)

A Perl module used to generate command-line option parsers.
Available from:
http://www.ling.uni-potsdam.de/~moocow/projects/perl/index.html#gog

If make fails due to lacking optgen.perl, either get & install this
module, or run:

 touch src/programs/*_cmdparser.*[ch]

from the distribution root directory, and call make again.

Tested version(s): 0.13

=item pod2man, pod2text, pod2html, ... (Optional)

The Perl documentation converstion utilities, required
for (re-)building the correspdonding program documentation
formats.  These should have come with your Perl.  On Debian
derivates, they live in the "perl-doc" package.  They should be
automatically detected by ./configure if they are installed in your
PATH.  Otherwise, you can use the variables POD2MAN, POD2TEXT;
POD2HTML, and/or POD2LATEX to specify their locations.

Manpages and HTML documentation are distributed with the "official" source
distribution, so you should only need the "pod2xyz" programs if you're
building from CVS/SVN, or if you want to generate one or more additional
documentation formats (e.g. text, DVI, PostScript, or PDF).

=back



=head1 INSTALLATION

Issue the following commands to the shell:

 sh ./configure
 make
 make install

See the file INSTALL in the top-level distribution
directory for details.

=head1 BUILD FROM CVS/SVN

To build from CVS or SVN sources, you need the GNU
utilities aclocal, automake, autoconf, and libtool.
If you have these, you can just run the top-level
script:

 sh ./autoreconf.sh

This will create the 'configure' script and other
necessary build files.

You might also need Perl and the Getopt::Gen Perl module,
which should be available from wherever you acquired
these sources.


=head1 SYSTEMS ON WHICH MOOT HAS SUCCESSFULLY COMPILED

=over 4

=item linux / gcc

=item MacOS-X / gcc

=item win32 / mingw32

=item ... more to come, maybe...

=back


=head1 KNOWN ISSUES


=head2 Common Warnings

=over 4

=item "WARNING: ..." from configure

This is a warning.
This is only a warning.
It may be responsible for fatal errors from 'make' B<if and only if>
you are building from SVN.  Otherwise, you can safely ignore it (probably).


=item "flex++bison++.pc not found"

If you want this to go away, install my (old, unmaintained)
flex++bison++ package from:

 http://www.ling.uni-potsdam.de/~moocow/projects/moot/flex++bison++-0.0.5.tar.gz

Otherwise, keep your distro's versions and
ignore the warning.

=item "cannot find optgen.pl program"

If you're building from CVS/SVN, this will be fatal. Get my Getopt::Gen
perl module (and perl, if you haven't already), build it,
install it, then run moot's ./configure again.

=back


=head2 Known Bugs

=over 4

=item "Unknown 'strict' tag(s) '1' at ... Parse/Template.pm line 2"

Your Parse::Lex module is broken.
It turns out that Parse::Lex v2.15 is Just Plain Broken, and it appears to be
unmaintained.
Get the sources from CPAN, and comment out all of the offending 'use strict ...' lines,
or just install the hacked version from:

 http://www.ling.uni-potsdam.de/~moocow/projects/perl/ParseLex-2.15-hacked.tar.gz


=item "osfcn.h No such file or directory"

osfcn.h appears to be a relic of my antiquated flex++bison++
package; you may attempt to use and/or modify the file
'src/libmoot/myosfcn.h' that comes with the distribution as a
workaround. Otherwise, you should try to rebuild the lexer/parser
.cc and .h files by hand:

  bash$ cd moot-XX.YY
  bash$ touch ./src/libmoot/*.ll ./src/libmoot/*.yy
  bash$ make

... ought to do the trick, assuming you have Coetmeur's flex++ and bison++
installed.

=back


=head1 ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

Development of this package was supported by the project
'Kollokationen im WE<ouml>rterbuch'
("collocations in the dictionary", http://www.bbaw.de/forschung/kollokationen )
in association with the project
'Digitales WE<ouml>rterbuch deutscher Sprache des 20. Jahrhunderts (DWDS)'
("digital dictionary of the German language of the 20th century", http://www.dwds.de )
at the Berlin-Brandenburgische Akademie der Wissenschaften ( http://www.bbaw.de )
with funding from
the Alexander von Humboldt Stiftung ( http://www.avh.de )
and from the Zukunftsinvestitionsprogramm of the
German federal government.

I am grateful to Christiane Fellbaum, Alexander Geyken,
Thomas Hanneforth, Gerald Neumann, Edmund Pohl, Alexey Sokirko,
and others for offering useful insights in the course of development
of this package.

Thomas Hanneforth wrote and maintains the libFSM C++ library
for finite-state device operations
used in the development of the HMM tagger / disambiguator.

Alexander Geyken and Thomas Hanneforth developed the
rule-based morphological analysis system for German
which was used in the development and testing of the
class-based HMM tagger / disambiguator.

=head1 AUTHOR

Bryan Jurish E<lt>moocow@cpan.orgE<gt>

=cut
