
=pod

=head1 NAME

mootngsmooth - moocow's HMM part-of-speech tagger/disambiguator: n-gram smoother.



=head1 SYNOPSIS

mootngsmooth [OPTIONS] MODEL.123

 Arguments:
    MODEL.123  Input n-gram model file

 Options
    -h       --help            Print help and exit.
    -V       --version         Print version and exit.
    -cFILE   --rcfile=FILE     Read an alternate configuration file.
    -vLEVEL  --verbose=LEVEL   Verbosity level.
    -oFILE   --output=FILE     Specify output n-gram model file (default=stdout).
    -wTAG    --newtag=TAG      Specify new-tag string (default=@NEW)
    -N       --verbose-ngrams  Generate long-form ngrams (default=no)

=cut

###############################################################
# Description
###############################################################
=pod

=head1 DESCRIPTION

moocow's HMM part-of-speech tagger/disambiguator: n-gram smoother.


'mootngsmooth' adds pseudo-elements to a moot n-gram model file.

See L<mootfiles> for details on moot model file formats.


=cut

###############################################################
# Arguments
###############################################################
=pod

=head1 ARGUMENTS

=over 4

=item C<MODEL.123>

Input n-gram model file


MODEL should text n-gram model.

For details on moot file formats, see L<mootfiles>.


=back



=cut


###############################################################
# Options
###############################################################
=pod

=head1 OPTIONS

=over 4

=item C<--help> , C<-h>

Print help and exit.

Default: '0'




=item C<--version> , C<-V>

Print version and exit.

Default: '0'




=item C<--rcfile=FILE> , C<-cFILE>

Read an alternate configuration file.

Default: 'NULL'

See also: L<CONFIGURATION FILES>.




=item C<--verbose=LEVEL> , C<-vLEVEL>

Verbosity level.

Default: '3'

Be more or less verbose.  Recognized values are in the range 0..3.




=item C<--output=FILE> , C<-oFILE>

Specify output n-gram model file (default=stdout).

Default: '-'


Smoothed n-grams will be written to FILE.





=item C<--newtag=TAG> , C<-wTAG>

Specify new-tag string (default=@NEW)

Default: '@NEW'




=item C<--verbose-ngrams> , C<-N>

Generate long-form ngrams (default=no)

Default: '0'




=back




=cut

###############################################################
# configuration files
###############################################################
=pod

=head1 CONFIGURATION FILES

Configuration files are expected to contain lines of the form:

    LONG_OPTION_NAME    OPTION_VALUE

where LONG_OPTION_NAME is the long name of some option,
without the leading '--', and OPTION_VALUE is the value for
that option, if any.  Fields are whitespace-separated.
Blank lines and comments (lines beginning with '#')
are ignored.

The following configuration files are read by default:

=over 4

=item * /etc/mootngsmoothrc

=item * ~/.mootngsmoothrc

=back

=cut



###############################################################
# Addenda
###############################################################
=pod

=head1 ADDENDA



=head2 About this Document

Documentation file auto-generated by optgen.perl version 0.06
using Getopt::Gen version 0.13.
Translation was initiated
as:

   optgen.perl -l --nocfile --nohfile --notimestamp -F mootngsmooth mootngsmooth.gog

=cut


###############################################################
# Bugs
###############################################################
=pod

=head1 BUGS AND LIMITATIONS



None known.



=cut

###############################################################
# Footer
###############################################################
=pod

=head1 ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS


Development of this package was supported by the project
'Kollokationen im WE<ouml>rterbuch'
( "collocations in the dictionary", http://www.bbaw.de/forschung/kollokationen )
in association with the project
'Digitales WE<ouml>rterbuch der deutschen Sprache des 20. Jahrhunderts (DWDS)'
( "digital dictionary of the German language of the 20th century", http://www.dwds.de )
at the Berlin-Brandenburgische Akademie der Wissenschaften ( http://www.bbaw.de )
with funding from
the Alexander von Humboldt Stiftung ( http://www.avh.de )
and from the Zukunftsinvestitionsprogramm of the
German federal government.

I am grateful to Christiane Fellbaum, Alexander Geyken,
Gerald Neumann, Edmund Pohl, Alexey Sokirko, and others
for offering useful insights in the course of development
of this package.

Thomas Hanneforth wrote and maintains the libFSM C++ library
for finite-state device operations used by the
class-based HMM tagger / disambiguator, without which
this package could not have been built.

Alexander Geyken and Thomas Hanneforth developed the
rule-based morphological analysis system for German
which was used in the development and testing of the
class-based HMM tagger / disambiguator.


=head1 AUTHOR

Bryan Jurish E<lt>moocow@ling.uni-potsdam.deE<gt>

=head1 SEE ALSO


L<mootfiles>,
L<mootrain>,
L<mootcompile>,
L<moot>


=cut


