
=pod

=head1 NAME

mootchurn - File format converter for moocow's PoS tagger.



=head1 SYNOPSIS

mootchurn [OPTIONS] INPUT(s)

 Arguments:
    INPUT(s)  Input files / file-lists.

 Options
    -h          --help                      Print help and exit.
    -V          --version                   Print version and exit.
    -cFILE      --rcfile=FILE               Read an alternate configuration file.
    -vLEVEL     --verbose=LEVEL             Verbosity level.
    -dNTOKS     --dots=NTOKS                Print a dot for every NTOKS tokens processed.
    -l          --list                      INPUTs are file-lists, not filenames.
    -oFILE      --output=FILE               Specify output file (default=stdout).

 Format Options
    -t          --tokens                    Read input token-wise.
    -IFORMAT    --input-format=FORMAT       Specify input file(s) format(s).
    -OFORMAT    --output-format=FORMAT      Specify output file format.

 XML Options
                --input-encoding=ENCODING   Override XML document input encoding
                --output-encoding=ENCODING  Set default XML output encoding

=cut

###############################################################
# Description
###############################################################
=pod

=head1 DESCRIPTION

File format converter for moocow's PoS tagger.


'mootchurn' is a file-format converter for use with the
'moot' part-of-speech tagging tools.  See L<mootfiles>
for details on moot file formats.


=cut

###############################################################
# Arguments
###############################################################
=pod

=head1 ARGUMENTS

=over 4

=item C<INPUT(s)>

Input files / file-lists.


Input files should be 'cooked' in some format
known to moot.

See also the '--list' option.

For details on moot file formats, see L<mootfiles>.


=back



=cut


###############################################################
# Options
###############################################################
=pod

=head1 OPTIONS

=over 4

=item C<--help> , C<-h>

Print help and exit.

Default: '0'




=item C<--version> , C<-V>

Print version and exit.

Default: '0'




=item C<--rcfile=FILE> , C<-cFILE>

Read an alternate configuration file.

Default: 'NULL'

See also: L<CONFIGURATION FILES>.




=item C<--verbose=LEVEL> , C<-vLEVEL>

Verbosity level.

Default: '5'


Be more or less verbose.  Recognized values are in the range 0..5:

=over 4

=item 0

Be silent.

=item 1

Print error messages to stderr.

=item 2

Print warnings to stderr.

=item 3

Print summary information to stderr.

=item 4

Print progress information to stderr.

=item 5

Print everything.

=back





=item C<--dots=NTOKS> , C<-dNTOKS>

Print a dot for every NTOKS tokens processed.

Default: '0'

Zero (the default) means that no dots will be printed.




=item C<--list> , C<-l>

INPUTs are file-lists, not filenames.

Default: '0'

Useful for large batch-processing jobs.




=item C<--output=FILE> , C<-oFILE>

Specify output file (default=stdout).

Default: '-'




=back

=cut

#--------------------------------------------------------------
# Option-Group Format Options
#--------------------------------------------------------------
=pod

=head2 Format Options

=over 4

=item C<--tokens> , C<-t>

Read input token-wise.

Default: '0'


Default behavior is to read sentence-wise.





=item C<--input-format=FORMAT> , C<-IFORMAT>

Specify input file(s) format(s).

Default: 'NULL'


Value should be a comma-separated list of format flag names,
optionally prefixed with an exclamation point (!) to indicate
negation.

Default='WellDone'

See 'I/O Format Flags' in L<mootfiles> for details.





=item C<--output-format=FORMAT> , C<-OFORMAT>

Specify output file format.

Default: 'NULL'


Value should be a comma-separated list of format flag names,
optionally prefixed with an exclamation point (!) to indicate
negation.

Default='WellDone'

See 'I/O Format Flags' in L<mootfiles> for details.





=back

=cut

#--------------------------------------------------------------
# Option-Group XML Options
#--------------------------------------------------------------
=pod

=head2 XML Options

=over 4

=item C<--input-encoding=ENCODING>

Override XML document input encoding

Default: 'NULL'


Potentially useful for XML documents without encoding declarations





=item C<--output-encoding=ENCODING>

Set default XML output encoding

Default: 'NULL'


Potentially useful for human-readable XML documents,
but also dangerous.





=back




=cut

###############################################################
# configuration files
###############################################################
=pod

=head1 CONFIGURATION FILES

Configuration files are expected to contain lines of the form:

    LONG_OPTION_NAME    OPTION_VALUE

where LONG_OPTION_NAME is the long name of some option,
without the leading '--', and OPTION_VALUE is the value for
that option, if any.  Fields are whitespace-separated.
Blank lines and comments (lines beginning with '#')
are ignored.

The following configuration files are read by default:

=over 4

=item * /etc/mootchurnrc

=item * ~/.mootchurnrc

=back

=cut



###############################################################
# Addenda
###############################################################
=pod

=head1 ADDENDA



=head2 Caveats

When converting to XML, you should first ensure that your data
is properly encoded, using either character entities or UTF-8
to encode non-ASCII characters.

When convering from XML, all data will be written in the
encoding declared in the document, or in UTF-8 if no encoding
was declared.



=head2 About this Document

Documentation file auto-generated by optgen.perl version 0.06
using Getopt::Gen version 0.11.
Translation was initiated
as:

   optgen.perl -l --nocfile --nohfile --notimestamp -F mootchurn mootchurn.gog

=cut


###############################################################
# Bugs
###############################################################
=pod

=head1 BUGS AND LIMITATIONS



None known.



=cut

###############################################################
# Footer
###############################################################
=pod

=head1 ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

Perl by Larry Wall.

Getopt::Gen by Bryan Jurish.

=head1 AUTHOR

Bryan Jurish E<lt>moocow@ling.uni-potsdam.deE<gt>

=head1 SEE ALSO


L<mootfiles>
L<mootpp>,
mootm(1),
L<mootrain>,
L<mootcompile>,
L<mootdump>,
L<moot>,
L<mooteval>


=cut



