
=pod

=head1 NAME

moot - moocow's HMM part-of-speech tagger/disambiguator.



=head1 SYNOPSIS

moot [OPTIONS] INPUT(s)

 Arguments:
    INPUT(s)  Input files / file-lists.

 Options
    -h          --help                       Print help and exit.
    -V          --version                    Print version and exit.
    -cFILE      --rcfile=FILE                Read an alternate configuration file.
    -vLEVEL     --verbose=LEVEL              Verbosity level.
    -B          --no-banner                  Suppress initial banner message (implied at verbosity levels <= 2)
    -H          --no-header                  Suppres leading comments in destination file.
    -dNTOKS     --dots=NTOKS                 Print a dot for every NTOKS tokens processed.
    -l          --list                       INPUTs are file-lists, not filenames.
    -r          --recover                    Attempt to recover from minor errors.
    -S          --stream                     Use stream-wise I/O routines instead of sentence buffers.
    -oFILE      --output=FILE                Specify output file (default=stdout).

 Format Options
    -IFORMAT    --input-format=FORMAT        Specify input file(s) format(s).
    -OFORMAT    --output-format=FORMAT       Specify output file format.
                --input-encoding=ENCODING    Override XML document input encoding.
                --output-encoding=ENCODING   Set default XML output encoding.

 HMM Options
    -MMODEL     --model=MODEL                Use HMM model file(s) MODEL.
    -gBOOL      --hash-ngrams=BOOL           Whether to hash stored n-grams (default=no)
    -aLEN       --trie-depth=LEN             Maximum depth of suffix trie.
    -AFREQ      --trie-threshhold=FREQ       Frequency upper bound for trie inclusion.
                --trie-theta=FLOAT           Suffix backoff coefficient.
    -LBOOL      --use-classes=BOOL           Whether to use lexical class-probabilities.
    -FBOOL      --use-flavors=BOOL           Whether to use token 'flavor' heuristics (default=1 (true))
    -RBOOL      --relax=BOOL                 Whether to relax token-tag associability (default=1 (true))
    -NFLOATS    --nlambdas=FLOATS            N-Gram smoothing constants (default=estimate)
    -WFLOATS    --wlambdas=FLOATS            Lexical smoothing constants (default=estimate)
    -CFLOATS    --clambdas=FLOATS            Lexical-class smoothing constants (default=estimate)
    -tDOUBLE    --unknown-threshhold=DOUBLE  Freq. threshhold for 'unknown' lexical probabilities
    -TDOUBLE    --class-threshhold=DOUBLE    Freq. threshhold for 'unknown' class probabilities
    -uNAME      --unknown-token=NAME         Symbolic name of the 'unknown' token
    -UNAME      --unknown-tag=NAME           Symbolic name of the 'unknown' tag
    -eTAG       --eos-tag=TAG                Specify boundary tag (default=__$)
    -ZDOUBLE    --beam-width=DOUBLE          Specify cutoff factor for beam pruning
                --save-ambiguities           Annotate tagged tokens with lexical ambiguities
    -m          --mark-unknown               Mark unknown tokens.

=cut

###############################################################
# Description
###############################################################
=pod

=head1 DESCRIPTION

moocow's HMM part-of-speech tagger/disambiguator.


'moot' is a Hidden Markov Model (HMM) Part-of-Spech (PoS)
tagger / disambiguator program based on the 'libmoot' library.

It takes as its input one or more 'rare' (-tagged,-analyzed)
or 'medium rare' (-tagged,+analyzed) files and produces a
'medium' (+tagged,-analyzed) or 'well done' (+tagged,+analyzed)
file, respectively.  See L<mootfiles> for details on moot file
formats.


=cut

###############################################################
# Arguments
###############################################################
=pod

=head1 ARGUMENTS

=over 4

=item C<INPUT(s)>

Input files / file-lists.


Input files should be 'cooked' text files
of either the 'rare' (-tagged,-analyzed) or
'medium rare' (-tagged,+analyzed) variety.

See also the '--list' option.

For details on moot file formats, see L<mootfiles>.


=back



=cut


###############################################################
# Options
###############################################################
=pod

=head1 OPTIONS

=over 4

=item C<--help> , C<-h>

Print help and exit.

Default: '0'




=item C<--version> , C<-V>

Print version and exit.

Default: '0'




=item C<--rcfile=FILE> , C<-cFILE>

Read an alternate configuration file.

Default: 'NULL'

See also: L<CONFIGURATION FILES>.




=item C<--verbose=LEVEL> , C<-vLEVEL>

Verbosity level.

Default: '3'

Be more or less verbose.  Recognized values are in the range 0..6:

=over 4

=item 0 (silent)

Disable all diagnostic messages.

=item 1 (errors)

Print error messages to stderr.

=item 2 (warnings)

Print warnings to stderr.

=item 3 (info)

Print general diagnostic information to stderr.

=item 4 (progress)

Print progress information to stderr.

=item 5 (debug)

Print debugging information to stderr (if applicable).

=item 6 (trace)

Print execution trace information to stderr (if applicable).

=back





=item C<--no-banner> , C<-B>

Suppress initial banner message (implied at verbosity levels E<lt>= 2)

Default: '0'




=item C<--no-header> , C<-H>

Suppres leading comments in destination file.

Default: '0'


Primarily useful as a workaround for nonconformant conservative XML output.





=item C<--dots=NTOKS> , C<-dNTOKS>

Print a dot for every NTOKS tokens processed.

Default: '0'

Zero (the default) means that no dots will be printed.




=item C<--list> , C<-l>

INPUTs are file-lists, not filenames.

Default: '0'


If this flag is given, the FILE(s) arguments should be lists
of input filenames, one filename per line, which should be
processed.  Otherwise, the FILE(s) arguments are interpreted
as filenames of the input files themselves.

Potentially useful for large batch-processing jobs.





=item C<--recover> , C<-r>

Attempt to recover from minor errors.

Default: '0'


Minor errors such as missing files, etc. cause an error message to be
emitted but do not cause the program to abort if this option is specified.

Potentially useful for large automated batch-processing jobs.





=item C<--stream> , C<-S>

Use stream-wise I/O routines instead of sentence buffers.

Default: '0'


Should have a smaller memory footprint for long input sentences, but may
be slower than the default.





=item C<--output=FILE> , C<-oFILE>

Specify output file (default=stdout).

Default: '-'




=back

=cut

#--------------------------------------------------------------
# Option-Group Format Options
#--------------------------------------------------------------
=pod

=head2 Format Options

=over 4

=item C<--input-format=FORMAT> , C<-IFORMAT>

Specify input file(s) format(s).

Default: 'NULL'


Value should be a comma-separated list of format flag names,
optionally prefixed with an exclamation point (!) to indicate
negation.

Default='MediumRare'

See 'I/O Format Flags' in L<mootfiles> for details.





=item C<--output-format=FORMAT> , C<-OFORMAT>

Specify output file format.

Default: 'NULL'


Value should be a comma-separated list of format flag names,
optionally prefixed with an exclamation point (!) to indicate
negation.

Default='WellDone'

See 'I/O Format Flags' in L<mootfiles> for details.





=item C<--input-encoding=ENCODING>

Override XML document input encoding.

Default: 'NULL'


Potentially useful for XML documents without encoding declarations.





=item C<--output-encoding=ENCODING>

Set default XML output encoding.

Default: 'NULL'


Slower, but potentially useful for human-readable XML output.





=back

=cut

#--------------------------------------------------------------
# Option-Group HMM Options
#--------------------------------------------------------------
=pod

=head2 HMM Options

=over 4

=item C<--model=MODEL> , C<-MMODEL>

Use HMM model file(s) MODEL.

Default: 'moothmm'


See 'HMM MODEL FILE FORMATS' in L<mootfiles> for details
on model file formats.





=item C<--hash-ngrams=BOOL> , C<-gBOOL>

Whether to hash stored n-grams (default=no)

Default: '0'


If specified and true, tag n-grams will be stored in a slow but memory-friendly
hash.  Otherwise, a fast but large array will be used.





=item C<--trie-depth=LEN> , C<-aLEN>

Maximum depth of suffix trie.

Default: '0'


Use suffixes of up to LEN characters to estimate probabilities
of unknown words.

B<Warning>: this feature is B<EXPERIMENTAL>!  Use at your own risk.





=item C<--trie-threshhold=FREQ> , C<-AFREQ>

Frequency upper bound for trie inclusion.

Default: '10'


Use words of at most frequency FREQ to construct the suffix trie.





=item C<--trie-theta=FLOAT>

Suffix backoff coefficient.

Default: '0'


Specify suffix-trie backoff coefficient for smoothing.
Specifying a value of zero (the default) causes the
smoothing coefficient to be estimated.





=item C<--use-classes=BOOL> , C<-LBOOL>

Whether to use lexical class-probabilities.

Default: '1'


Only useful if your file contains a priori analyses.
Default behavior is to try and use classes if you specify
a non-empty class-frequency file.





=item C<--use-flavors=BOOL> , C<-FBOOL>

Whether to use token 'flavor' heuristics (default=1 (true))

Default: '1'


Default behavior is to use flavor heuristics as specified by the model (usually built-in).





=item C<--relax=BOOL> , C<-RBOOL>

Whether to relax token-tag associability (default=1 (true))

Default: '1'


If nonzero, 'tag' fields of token analyses will be used only as a potential
estimator of lexical probability, if at all.
Otherwise (regardless of whether lexical classes are are being used as a
probability estimator), 'tag' fields of token analyses will be interpreted
as imposing 'hard' restrictions on which tags may occur with the token in question.

See the C<--use-classes=BOOL> option and/or L<mootfiles> for more details on the
use of lexical classes.





=item C<--nlambdas=FLOATS> , C<-NFLOATS>

N-Gram smoothing constants (default=estimate)

Default: 'NULL'


FLOATS should be a string of the form "LAMBDA1,LAMBDA2,LAMBDA3"
(without the quotes), where each LAMBDA$i is a floating-point constant.

=over 4

=item LAMBDA_1

is the constant smoothing coefficient for unigram probabilities,

=item LAMBDA_2

is the constant smoothing coefficient for bigram probabilities,

=item LAMBDA_3

is the constant smoothing coefficient for trigram probabilities
(only meaningful if libmoot was built with '--enable-trigrams=yes'.
See the output of

 mootconfig --options

for details.

=back

If you override the default values, you should choose values such that
LAMBDA_1 + LAMBDA_2 + LAMBDA_3 == 1.0.





=item C<--wlambdas=FLOATS> , C<-WFLOATS>

Lexical smoothing constants (default=estimate)

Default: 'NULL'


FLOATS should be a string of the form "LAMBDA_W0,LAMBDA_W1"
(without the quotes), where each LAMBDA_W$i is a floating-point
constant.

=over 4

=item LAMBDA_W0

is the constant minimum lexical probability,

=item LAMBDA_W1

is the constant smoothing coefficient for lexical probabilities.

=back

If you override the default values, you should choose values such that
LAMBDA_W0 + LAMBDA_W1 == 1.0.





=item C<--clambdas=FLOATS> , C<-CFLOATS>

Lexical-class smoothing constants (default=estimate)

Default: 'NULL'


LAMBDAS should be a string of the form "LAMBDA_C0,LAMBDA_C1"
(without the quotes), where each LAMBDA_C$i is a floating-point constant.

=over 4

=item LAMBDA_C0

is the constant minimum lexical-class probability,

=item LAMBDA_C1

is the constant smoothing coefficient for lexical-class probabilities.

=back

If you override the default values, you should choose values such that
LAMBDA_C0 + LAMBDA_C1 == 1.0.





=item C<--unknown-threshhold=DOUBLE> , C<-tDOUBLE>

Freq. threshhold for 'unknown' lexical probabilities

Default: '1.0'


Lexical probabilities for unknown tokens in the input are estimated
from tokens which occur at most FLOAT times in the model.





=item C<--class-threshhold=DOUBLE> , C<-TDOUBLE>

Freq. threshhold for 'unknown' class probabilities

Default: '1.0'


Class probabilities for unrecognized tokens  in the input are estimated
from classes which occur at most FLOAT times in the model
and/or from the empty class.





=item C<--unknown-token=NAME> , C<-uNAME>

Symbolic name of the 'unknown' token

Default: '@UNKNOWN'


You can use this value to include lexical frequency information
for unknown input tokens in the lexical model file.





=item C<--unknown-tag=NAME> , C<-UNAME>

Symbolic name of the 'unknown' tag

Default: 'UNKNOWN'

You should never see or need this tag.




=item C<--eos-tag=TAG> , C<-eTAG>

Specify boundary tag (default=__$)

Default: '__$'


This is the pseudo-tag used in the n-gram model file to represent
sentence boundaries, both beginning- and end-of-sentence.  It should
not be an element of the actual tag-set -- that is, it should not
be a valid analysis for any token.





=item C<--beam-width=DOUBLE> , C<-ZDOUBLE>

Specify cutoff factor for beam pruning

Default: '1000'


During Viterbi search, paths will be ignored if their probabilities
are less than 1/NUM*p_best , where p_best is the probability of
the current best path.  Setting this option to zero disables
beam pruning.





=item C<--save-ambiguities>

Annotate tagged tokens with lexical ambiguities

Default: '0'


Useful for debugging.





=item C<--mark-unknown> , C<-m>

Mark unknown tokens.

Default: '0'


Useful for debugging.





=back




=cut

###############################################################
# configuration files
###############################################################
=pod

=head1 CONFIGURATION FILES

Configuration files are expected to contain lines of the form:

    LONG_OPTION_NAME    OPTION_VALUE

where LONG_OPTION_NAME is the long name of some option,
without the leading '--', and OPTION_VALUE is the value for
that option, if any.  Fields are whitespace-separated.
Blank lines and comments (lines beginning with '#')
are ignored.

The following configuration files are read by default:

=over 4

=item * /etc/mootrc

=item * ~/.mootrc

=back

=cut



###############################################################
# Addenda
###############################################################
=pod

=head1 ADDENDA



=head2 About this Document

Documentation file auto-generated by optgen.perl version 0.06
using Getopt::Gen version 0.13.
Translation was initiated
as:

   optgen.perl -l --nocfile --nohfile --notimestamp -F moot moot.gog

=cut


###############################################################
# Bugs
###############################################################
=pod

=head1 BUGS AND LIMITATIONS



None known.



=cut

###############################################################
# Footer
###############################################################
=pod

=head1 ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS


Development of this package was supported by the project
'Kollokationen im WE<ouml>rterbuch'
( "collocations in the dictionary", http://www.bbaw.de/forschung/kollokationen )
in association with the project
'Digitales WE<ouml>rterbuch der deutschen Sprache des 20. Jahrhunderts (DWDS)'
( "digital dictionary of the German language of the 20th century", http://www.dwds.de )
at the Berlin-Brandenburgische Akademie der Wissenschaften ( http://www.bbaw.de )
with funding from
the Alexander von Humboldt Stiftung ( http://www.avh.de )
and from the Zukunftsinvestitionsprogramm of the
German federal government.

I am grateful to Christiane Fellbaum, Alexander Geyken,
Gerald Neumann, Edmund Pohl, Alexey Sokirko, and others
for offering useful insights in the course of development
of this package.

Thomas Hanneforth wrote and maintains the libFSM C++ library
for finite-state device operations used by the
class-based HMM tagger / disambiguator, without which
this package could not have been built.

Alexander Geyken and Thomas Hanneforth developed the
rule-based morphological analysis system for German
which was used in the development and testing of the
class-based HMM tagger / disambiguator.


=head1 AUTHOR

Bryan Jurish E<lt>moocow@cpan.orgE<gt>

=head1 SEE ALSO


L<mootfiles>
L<mootpp>,
mootm(1),
L<mootrain>,
L<mootcompile>,
L<mootdump>,
L<mooteval>,


=cut


