
=pod

=head1 NAME

mootrain - moocow's part-of-speech tagger : HMM trainer



=head1 SYNOPSIS

mootrain [OPTIONS] INPUT(s)

 Arguments:
    INPUT(s)  Tagged input corpus file(s).

 Options
    -h          --help                       Print help and exit.
    -V          --version                    Print version and exit.
    -cFILE      --rcfile=FILE                Read an alternate configuration file.
    -vLEVEL     --verbose=LEVEL              Verbosity level.
    -B          --no-banner                  Suppress initial banner message (implied at verbosity levels <= 1)
    -oSTRING    --output=STRING              Specify basename for output files (default=INPUT)
    -IFORMAT    --input-format=FORMAT        Specify input file(s) format(s).
                --input-encoding=ENCODING    Override document encoding for XML input.

 Model Format Options
    -l          --lex                        Generate only lexical frequency file.
    -n          --ngrams                     Generate only n-gram frequency file.
    -C          --classes                    Generate only lexical-class frequency file.
    -F          --flavors                    Generate only flavor heuristic file.
    -eTAG       --eos-tag=TAG                Specify boundary tag (default=__$)
    -N          --verbose-ngrams             Generate long-form ngrams (default=no)
    -fFILE      --flavors-from=FILE          Use flavor heuristics from FILE (default=built-in).
    -tDOUBLE    --unknown-threshhold=DOUBLE  Freq. threshhold for 'unknown' lexical probabilities

=cut

###############################################################
# Description
###############################################################
=pod

=head1 DESCRIPTION

moocow's part-of-speech tagger : HMM trainer


'mootrain' gathers training data for the HMM part-of-speech tagger
used by the 'moot' program  from a tagged training corpus.
The training
corpus should be in 'medium' (+tagged,-analyzed) or 'well done'
(+tagged,+analyzed) format.  The output file(s) are text-format
raw frequency models.

See L<mootfiles> for details on moot file formats.


=cut

###############################################################
# Arguments
###############################################################
=pod

=head1 ARGUMENTS

=over 4

=item C<INPUT(s)>

Tagged input corpus file(s).


Input files should be 'medium' (+tagged,-analyzed)
or 'well done' (+tagged,-analyzed).

See L<mootfiles> for details on moot file formats.


=back



=cut


###############################################################
# Options
###############################################################
=pod

=head1 OPTIONS

=over 4

=item C<--help> , C<-h>

Print help and exit.

Default: '0'




=item C<--version> , C<-V>

Print version and exit.

Default: '0'




=item C<--rcfile=FILE> , C<-cFILE>

Read an alternate configuration file.

Default: 'NULL'

See also: L<CONFIGURATION FILES>.




=item C<--verbose=LEVEL> , C<-vLEVEL>

Verbosity level.

Default: '3'

Be more or less verbose.  Recognized values are in the range 0..6:

=over 4

=item 0 (silent)

Disable all diagnostic messages.

=item 1 (errors)

Print error messages to stderr.

=item 2 (warnings)

Print warnings to stderr.

=item 3 (info)

Print general diagnostic information to stderr.

=item 4 (progress)

Print progress information to stderr.

=item 5 (debug)

Print debugging information to stderr (if applicable).

=item 6 (trace)

Print execution trace information to stderr (if applicable).

=back





=item C<--no-banner> , C<-B>

Suppress initial banner message (implied at verbosity levels E<lt>= 1)

Default: '0'




=item C<--output=STRING> , C<-oSTRING>

Specify basename for output files (default=INPUT)

Default: 'NULL'




=item C<--input-format=FORMAT> , C<-IFORMAT>

Specify input file(s) format(s).

Default: 'NULL'


Value should be a comma-separated list of format flag names,
optionally prefixed with an exclamation point (!) to indicate
negation.

Default='WellDone'

Implied='Tagged'

See 'I/O Format Flags' in L<mootfiles> for details.





=item C<--input-encoding=ENCODING>

Override document encoding for XML input.

Default: 'NULL'


Potentially useful for XML documents without encoding declarations.





=back

=cut

#--------------------------------------------------------------
# Option-Group Model Format Options
#--------------------------------------------------------------
=pod

=head2 Model Format Options

=over 4

=item C<--lex> , C<-l>

Generate only lexical frequency file.

Default: '0'




=item C<--ngrams> , C<-n>

Generate only n-gram frequency file.

Default: '0'




=item C<--classes> , C<-C>

Generate only lexical-class frequency file.

Default: '0'




=item C<--flavors> , C<-F>

Generate only flavor heuristic file.

Default: '0'




=item C<--eos-tag=TAG> , C<-eTAG>

Specify boundary tag (default=__$)

Default: '__$'


This is the pseudo-tag used in the n-gram model file to represent
sentence boundaries, both beginning- and end-of-sentence.  It should
not be an element of the actual tag-set -- that is, it should not
be a valid analysis for any token.





=item C<--verbose-ngrams> , C<-N>

Generate long-form ngrams (default=no)

Default: '0'




=item C<--flavors-from=FILE> , C<-fFILE>

Use flavor heuristics from FILE (default=built-in).

Default: 'NULL'


If specified, FILE should be a flavor definition file containing a list of regular-expression based token classification rules
to be used in computing special entries for the lexical frequency file.
See L<mootfiles(5)|mootfiles> for a full specification of the moot flavor definition file format.
If unspecified, the default behavior is to use a built-in set of classification heuristics.
If FILE is an empty string, no flavor heuristics at all will be applied.





=item C<--unknown-threshhold=DOUBLE> , C<-tDOUBLE>

Freq. threshhold for 'unknown' lexical probabilities

Default: '1.0'


Setting this option to a non-zero value will case a special @UKNOWN entry to be added to the
lexical frequency model file.  Note that such an entry will be overridden
during model compilation if you specify a non-zero unknown lexical threshhold
to L<moot(1)|moot> or L<mootcompile(1)|mootcompile>.





=back




=cut

###############################################################
# configuration files
###############################################################
=pod

=head1 CONFIGURATION FILES

Configuration files are expected to contain lines of the form:

    LONG_OPTION_NAME    OPTION_VALUE

where LONG_OPTION_NAME is the long name of some option,
without the leading '--', and OPTION_VALUE is the value for
that option, if any.  Fields are whitespace-separated.
Blank lines and comments (lines beginning with '#')
are ignored.

The following configuration files are read by default:

=over 4

=item * /etc/mootrainrc

=item * ~/.mootrainrc

=back

=cut



###############################################################
# Addenda
###############################################################
=pod

=head1 ADDENDA



=head2 About this Document

Documentation file auto-generated by optgen.perl version 0.07
using Getopt::Gen version 0.13.
Translation was initiated
as:

   optgen.perl -l --nocfile --nohfile --notimestamp -F mootrain mootrain.gog

=cut


###############################################################
# Bugs
###############################################################
=pod

=head1 BUGS AND LIMITATIONS



Only ca. 99.998% compatible with tnt-para(1), due to token-typification
strangeness.



=cut

###############################################################
# Footer
###############################################################
=pod

=head1 ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS


Development of this package was supported by the project
'Kollokationen im WE<ouml>rterbuch'
( "collocations in the dictionary", http://www.bbaw.de/forschung/kollokationen )
in association with the project
'Digitales WE<ouml>rterbuch der deutschen Sprache des 20. Jahrhunderts (DWDS)'
( "digital dictionary of the German language of the 20th century", http://www.dwds.de )
at the Berlin-Brandenburgische Akademie der Wissenschaften ( http://www.bbaw.de )
with funding from
the Alexander von Humboldt Stiftung ( http://www.avh.de )
and from the Zukunftsinvestitionsprogramm of the
German federal government.

I am grateful to Christiane Fellbaum, Alexander Geyken,
Gerald Neumann, Edmund Pohl, Alexey Sokirko, and others
for offering useful insights in the course of development
of this package.

Thomas Hanneforth wrote and maintains the libFSM C++ library
for finite-state device operations used by the
class-based HMM tagger / disambiguator, without which
this package could not have been built.

Alexander Geyken and Thomas Hanneforth developed the
rule-based morphological analysis system for German
which was used in the development and testing of the
class-based HMM tagger / disambiguator.


=head1 AUTHOR

Bryan Jurish E<lt>moocow@cpan.orgE<gt>

=head1 SEE ALSO


L<mootfiles>,
mootm(1),
L<mootcompile>,
L<moot>


=cut


