
=pod

=head1 NAME

mootutils - moot Commandline Utilities

=head1 PROGRAMS

The following is a list of the programs
and user documentation contained in the libmoot package.
See the individual manpages for details.

=over 4

=item moot

moocow's HMM part-of-speech tagger/disambiguator.
(L<moot>)


=item mootchurn

File format converter for moocow's PoS tagger.
(L<mootchurn>)


=item mootcompile

moocow's HMM part-of-speech tagger/disambiguator: model compiler.
(L<mootcompile>)


=item mootconfig

moocow's part-of-speech tagger: report configuration
(L<mootconfig>)


=item mootdump

moocow's HMM part-of-speech tagger/disambiguator: model dumper.
(L<mootdump>)


=item mootdyn

moocow's dynamic HMM part-of-speech tagger/disambiguator.
(L<mootdyn>)


=item mooteval

Output evaluator for moocow's PoS tagger.
(L<mooteval>)


=item mootpp

Rudimentary tokenizer for moocow's part-of-speech tagger.
(L<mootpp>)


=item mootrain

moocow's part-of-speech tagger : HMM trainer
(L<mootrain>)


=item moottaste

moocow's HMM part-of-speech tagger: heuristic token classifier.
(L<moottaste>)


=item waste

Word- and Sentence-Token Extractor using a Hidden Markov Model
(L<waste>)


=item mootfiles

moot file formats
(L<mootfiles>)




=back

=cut

###############################################################
# Description
###############################################################
=pod

=head1 DESCRIPTION

The mootutils package provides a suite of command-line tools
for statistical part-of-speech (PoS) tagging using the
libmoot library.
In addition to traditional bigram tagging routines, libmoot
allows the use of user-specified I<a priori> sets of possible analyses
for each input token ("lexical classes"), a technique which has been shown
to lead to a reduction in errors of up to 21% with respect
to traditional Hidden-Markov-Model (HMM) methods.


=cut

###############################################################
# Addenda
###############################################################
=pod

=head1 ADDENDA

=head2 About this Document

Documentation file auto-generated by optgen.perl version 0.15.
Translation was initiated as:

   /usr/local/bin/optgen.perl --nocfile --nohfile --nopod --no-handle-help --no-handle-version --no-handle-rcfile --no-handle-error --notimestamp --template=mootutils.skel -

=cut


###############################################################
# Footer
###############################################################
=pod

=head1 ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS


Initial development of the this was supported by the project
'Kollokationen im WE<ouml>rterbuch'
( "collocations in the dictionary", http://www.bbaw.de/forschung/kollokationen )
in association with the project
'Digitales WE<ouml>rterbuch der deutschen Sprache des 20. Jahrhunderts (DWDS)'
( "digital dictionary of the German language of the 20th century", http://www.dwds.de )
at the Berlin-Brandenburgische Akademie der Wissenschaften ( http://www.bbaw.de )
with funding from
the Alexander von Humboldt Stiftung ( http://www.avh.de )
and from the Zukunftsinvestitionsprogramm of the
German federal government.
Development of the DynHMM and WASTE extensions was
supported by the DFG-funded projects
'Deutsches Textarchiv' ( "German text archive", http://www.deutschestextarchiv.de )
and 'DLEX'
at the Berlin-Brandenburgische Akademie der Wissenschaften.

The authors are grateful to Christiane Fellbaum, Alexander Geyken,
Gerald Neumann, Edmund Pohl, Alexey Sokirko, and others
for offering useful insights in the course of development
of this package.
Thomas Hanneforth wrote and maintains the libFSM C++ library
for finite-state device operations used by the
class-based HMM tagger / disambiguator, without which
moot could not have been built.
Alexander Geyken and Thomas Hanneforth developed the
rule-based morphological analysis system for German
which was used in the development and testing of the
class-based HMM tagger / disambiguator.



=head1 SEE ALSO

moot(1),
mootchurn(1),
mootcompile(1),
mootconfig(1),
mootdump(1),
mootdyn(1),
mooteval(1),
mootpp(1),
mootrain(1),
moottaste(1),
waste(1),
mootm(1)

=head1 AUTHOR

Bryan Jurish E<lt>moocow@cpan.orgE<gt>

=cut
