


=pod

=head1 NAME

mootconfig - moocow's part-of-speech tagger: report configuration



=head1 SYNOPSIS

mootconfig [OPTIONS]


 Options
    -V  --version   Display package version
        --cflags    Display C compiler flags
        --cppflags  Display C/C++ preprocessor flags
        --cxxflags  Display C++ compiler flags
        --ldflags   Display linker flags
        --libs      Display required linker libraries
        --options   Display compile-time options

=cut

###############################################################
# Description
###############################################################
=pod

=head1 DESCRIPTION

moocow's part-of-speech tagger: report configuration


'mootconfig' allows easy access to the options with which
the 'libmoot' library was built (on systems with a /bin/sh).


=cut

###############################################################
# Arguments
###############################################################



###############################################################
# Options
###############################################################

=pod

=head1 OPTIONS

=over 4

=item C<--version> , C<-V>

Display package version

Default: '0'




=item C<--cflags>

Display C compiler flags

Default: '0'




=item C<--cppflags>

Display C/C++ preprocessor flags

Default: '0'




=item C<--cxxflags>

Display C++ compiler flags

Default: '0'




=item C<--ldflags>

Display linker flags

Default: '0'




=item C<--libs>

Display required linker libraries

Default: '0'




=item C<--options>

Display compile-time options

Default: '0'




=back




=cut



###############################################################
# configuration files
###############################################################



###############################################################
# Addenda
###############################################################

=pod

=head1 ADDENDA



=head2 About this Document

Documentation file auto-generated by optgen.perl version 0.15
using Getopt::Gen version 0.15.
Translation was initiated
as:

   optgen.perl -l --nocfile --nohfile --no-handle-help --no-handle-version --no-handle-rcfile --no-handle-error --notimestamp -F mootconfig mootconfig.gog

=cut


###############################################################
# Bugs
###############################################################
=pod

=head1 BUGS AND LIMITATIONS

Unknown.

=cut

###############################################################
# Footer
###############################################################
=pod

=head1 ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS


Initial development of the this was supported by the project
'Kollokationen im WE<ouml>rterbuch'
( "collocations in the dictionary", http://www.bbaw.de/forschung/kollokationen )
in association with the project
'Digitales WE<ouml>rterbuch der deutschen Sprache des 20. Jahrhunderts (DWDS)'
( "digital dictionary of the German language of the 20th century", http://www.dwds.de )
at the Berlin-Brandenburgische Akademie der Wissenschaften ( http://www.bbaw.de )
with funding from
the Alexander von Humboldt Stiftung ( http://www.avh.de )
and from the Zukunftsinvestitionsprogramm of the
German federal government.
Development of the DynHMM and WASTE extensions was
supported by the DFG-funded projects
'Deutsches Textarchiv' ( "German text archive", http://www.deutschestextarchiv.de )
and 'DLEX'
at the Berlin-Brandenburgische Akademie der Wissenschaften.

The authors are grateful to Christiane Fellbaum, Alexander Geyken,
Gerald Neumann, Edmund Pohl, Alexey Sokirko, and others
for offering useful insights in the course of development
of this package.
Thomas Hanneforth wrote and maintains the libFSM C++ library
for finite-state device operations used by the
class-based HMM tagger / disambiguator, without which
moot could not have been built.
Alexander Geyken and Thomas Hanneforth developed the
rule-based morphological analysis system for German
which was used in the development and testing of the
class-based HMM tagger / disambiguator.



=head1 AUTHOR

Bryan Jurish E<lt>moocow@cpan.orgE<gt>

=head1 SEE ALSO


mootutils(1)


=cut


