
=pod

=head1 NAME

waste - Low-level rule-based codec for moot/WASTE HMM tokenizer.



=head1 SYNOPSIS

waste [OPTIONS] FILE(s)

 Arguments:
    FILE(s)  Input files

 Options
    -h        --help                  Print help and exit.
    -V        --version               Print version and exit.
    -cFILE    --rcfile=FILE           Read an alternate configuration file.
    -vLEVEL   --verbose=LEVEL         Verbosity level.
    -B        --no-banner             Suppress initial banner message (implied at verbosity levels <= 2)
    -l        --list                  Arguments are input-file lists.
    -r        --recover               Attempt to recover from minor errors.
    -oFILE    --output=FILE           Write output to FILE.

 Mode Options
    -f        --full                  Alias for --scan --lex --tag --decode (default)
    -s        --scan                  Enable raw text scanning stage.
    -S        --no-scan               Disable raw text scanning stage.
    -x        --lex                   Enable lexical classification stage.
    -X        --no-lex                Disable lexical classification stage.
    -t        --tag                   Enable HMM Viterbi tagging stage.
    -T        --no-tag                Disable HMM Viterbi tagging stage.
    -d        --decode                Enable post-Viterbi decoding stage.
    -D        --no-decode             Disable post-Viterbi decoding stage.

 Lexer-Only Options
    -aFILE    --abbrevs=FILE          Load abbreviation lexicon from FILE (1 word/line)
    -jFILE    --conjunctions=FILE     Load conjunction lexicon from FILE (1 word/line)
    -wFILE    --stopwords=FILE        Load stopword lexicon from FILE (1 word/line)
    -y        --norm-hyph             Enable hyphenation normalization in lexer

 HMM Options
    -MMODEL   --model=MODEL           Use HMM tokenizer model MODEL.

 Format Options
    -IFORMAT  --input-format=FORMAT   Specify input file format for -no-scan mode
    -OFORMAT  --output-format=FORMAT  Specify output file format.

=cut

###############################################################
# Description
###############################################################
=pod

=head1 DESCRIPTION

Low-level rule-based codec for moot/WASTE HMM tokenizer.


waste is the top-level command-line interface to the moot/WASTE HMM tokenizer system.
It can be used as a complete tokenization pipeline (--full, the default),
as a standalone scanner (--scan), lexical encoder (--lex), HMM disambiguator (--tag) or lexical decoder (--decode),
or as (almost) any combination  of the above components.
Input and output formats depend on the chosen mode of operation; in the default mode,
it takes as input one or more 'raw' files, and produces a 'medium' output file whose 'best-tag' fields
are strings of space-separated segment attribute bundles (i.e. probably not interesting unless you are
trying to debug a WASTE tokenizer model).
See L<mootfiles> for details on moot file formats.


=cut

###############################################################
# Arguments
###############################################################
=pod

=head1 ARGUMENTS

=over 4

=item C<FILE(s)>

Input files

See also the --list option.

=back



=cut


###############################################################
# Options
###############################################################
=pod

=head1 OPTIONS

=over 4

=item C<--help> , C<-h>

Print help and exit.

Default: '0'




=item C<--version> , C<-V>

Print version and exit.

Default: '0'




=item C<--rcfile=FILE> , C<-cFILE>

Read an alternate configuration file.

Default: 'NULL'

See also: L<CONFIGURATION FILES>.




=item C<--verbose=LEVEL> , C<-vLEVEL>

Verbosity level.

Default: '3'

Be more or less verbose.  Recognized values are in the range 0..6:

=over 4

=item 0 (silent)

Disable all diagnostic messages.

=item 1 (errors)

Print error messages to stderr.

=item 2 (warnings)

Print warnings to stderr.

=item 3 (info)

Print general diagnostic information to stderr.

=item 4 (progress)

Print progress information to stderr.

=item 5 (debug)

Print debugging information to stderr (if applicable).

=item 6 (trace)

Print execution trace information to stderr (if applicable).

=back





=item C<--no-banner> , C<-B>

Suppress initial banner message (implied at verbosity levels E<lt>= 2)

Default: '0'




=item C<--list> , C<-l>

Arguments are input-file lists.

Default: '0'


If this flag is given, the FILE(s) arguments should be lists
of input filenames, one filename per line, which should be
processed.  Otherwise, the FILE(s) arguments are interpreted
as filenames of the input files themselves.





=item C<--recover> , C<-r>

Attempt to recover from minor errors.

Default: '0'


Minor errors such as missing files, etc. cause an error message to be
emitted but do not cause the program to abort if this option is specified.
Useful for large automated batch-processing jobs.





=item C<--output=FILE> , C<-oFILE>

Write output to FILE.

Default: '-'


Output files are in 'rare' format: one token per line, a blank line
indicates a sentence boundary.





=back

=cut

#--------------------------------------------------------------
# Option-Group Mode Options
#--------------------------------------------------------------
=pod

=head2 Mode Options

=over 4

=item C<--full> , C<-f>

Alias for --scan --lex --tag --decode (default)

Default: '0'




=item C<--scan> , C<-s>

Enable raw text scanning stage.

Default: '0'




=item C<--no-scan> , C<-S>

Disable raw text scanning stage.

Default: '0'




=item C<--lex> , C<-x>

Enable lexical classification stage.

Default: '0'


If lexer stage is enabled, you should also specify --abbrevs, --conjunctions, and/or --stopwords
as appropriate for your HMM.





=item C<--no-lex> , C<-X>

Disable lexical classification stage.

Default: '0'




=item C<--tag> , C<-t>

Enable HMM Viterbi tagging stage.

Default: '0'


Requires --model option.





=item C<--no-tag> , C<-T>

Disable HMM Viterbi tagging stage.

Default: '0'




=item C<--decode> , C<-d>

Enable post-Viterbi decoding stage.

Default: '0'




=item C<--no-decode> , C<-D>

Disable post-Viterbi decoding stage.

Default: '0'




=back

=cut

#--------------------------------------------------------------
# Option-Group Lexer-Only Options
#--------------------------------------------------------------
=pod

=head2 Lexer-Only Options

=over 4

=item C<--abbrevs=FILE> , C<-aFILE>

Load abbreviation lexicon from FILE (1 word/line)

Default: 'NULL'


Only meaningful if --lex is enabled.





=item C<--conjunctions=FILE> , C<-jFILE>

Load conjunction lexicon from FILE (1 word/line)

Default: 'NULL'


Only meaningful if --lex is enabled.





=item C<--stopwords=FILE> , C<-wFILE>

Load stopword lexicon from FILE (1 word/line)

Default: 'NULL'


Only meaningful if --lex is enabled.





=item C<--norm-hyph> , C<-y>

Enable hyphenation normalization in lexer

Default: '0'


Only meaningful if --lex is enabled.





=back

=cut

#--------------------------------------------------------------
# Option-Group HMM Options
#--------------------------------------------------------------
=pod

=head2 HMM Options

=over 4

=item C<--model=MODEL> , C<-MMODEL>

Use HMM tokenizer model MODEL.

Default: 'waste.hmm'


See 'HMM MODEL FILE FORMATS' in L<mootfiles> for details on model file formats.
This option is intended to be used with a pre-compiled binary model.  If you
need to set addtitional runtime options, you should call C<moot> directly
in a pipeline, e.g.

  waste --scan -Or,loc INFILE.txt \\
  | waste --lex -aabbr.lex -jconj.lex -wstop.lex -Ir,loc -Omr,loc - \\
  | moot  --stream --model=MODEL --beam-width=100 -Imr,loc -Owd,loc - \\
  | waste --decode -Iwd,loc -Om,loc -o OUTFILE.wd






=back

=cut

#--------------------------------------------------------------
# Option-Group Format Options
#--------------------------------------------------------------
=pod

=head2 Format Options

=over 4

=item C<--input-format=FORMAT> , C<-IFORMAT>

Specify input file format for -no-scan mode

Default: 'NULL'


Value should be a comma-separated list of format flag names,
optionally prefixed with an exclamation point (!) to indicate
negation.  Only meaningful if the scanner stage has been
disabled with the -no-scan (-S) option.

Default='Text,Location'

See 'I/O Format Flags' in L<mootfiles> for details.





=item C<--output-format=FORMAT> , C<-OFORMAT>

Specify output file format.

Default: 'NULL'


Value should be a comma-separated list of format flag names,
optionally prefixed with an exclamation point (!) to indicate
negation.

Default='MediumRare,Location'

See 'I/O Format Flags' in L<mootfiles> for details.





=back




=cut

###############################################################
# configuration files
###############################################################
=pod

=head1 CONFIGURATION FILES

Configuration files are expected to contain lines of the form:

    LONG_OPTION_NAME    OPTION_VALUE

where LONG_OPTION_NAME is the long name of some option,
without the leading '--', and OPTION_VALUE is the value for
that option, if any.  Fields are whitespace-separated.
Blank lines and comments (lines beginning with '#')
are ignored.

No configuration files are read by default.

=cut



###############################################################
# Addenda
###############################################################
=pod

=head1 ADDENDA



=head2 Caveats

When writing in XML format, you should first ensure that your input data
is properly encoded in UTF-8.



=head2 About this Document

Documentation file auto-generated by optgen.perl version 0.07
using Getopt::Gen version 0.13.
Translation was initiated
as:

   optgen.perl -l --nocfile --nohfile --notimestamp -F waste waste.gog

=cut


###############################################################
# Bugs
###############################################################
=pod

=head1 BUGS AND LIMITATIONS

Unknown.

=cut

###############################################################
# Footer
###############################################################
=pod

=head1 ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS


Development of this package was supported by the project
'Kollokationen im WE<ouml>rterbuch'
( "collocations in the dictionary", http://www.bbaw.de/forschung/kollokationen )
in association with the project
'Digitales WE<ouml>rterbuch der deutschen Sprache des 20. Jahrhunderts (DWDS)'
( "digital dictionary of the German language of the 20th century", http://www.dwds.de )
at the Berlin-Brandenburgische Akademie der Wissenschaften ( http://www.bbaw.de )
with funding from
the Alexander von Humboldt Stiftung ( http://www.avh.de )
and from the Zukunftsinvestitionsprogramm of the
German federal government.

I am grateful to Christiane Fellbaum, Alexander Geyken,
Gerald Neumann, Edmund Pohl, Alexey Sokirko, and others
for offering useful insights in the course of development
of this package.

Thomas Hanneforth wrote and maintains the libFSM C++ library
for finite-state device operations used by the
class-based HMM tagger / disambiguator, without which
this package could not have been built.

Alexander Geyken and Thomas Hanneforth developed the
rule-based morphological analysis system for German
which was used in the development and testing of the
class-based HMM tagger / disambiguator.


=head1 AUTHOR

Bryan Jurish E<lt>moocow@cpan.orgE<gt> and Kay-Michael Würzner E<lt>wuerzner@bbaw.deE<gt>

=head1 SEE ALSO


moot(1),
mootrain(1),
mootcompile(1),
L<mootfiles>,
L<moot>,
L<mootchurn>


=cut


